Causality and interoperability documentation V3 (#6920)
digital-asset/daml: docs/source/concepts/local-ledger.rst

.. Copyright (c) 2020 The DAML Authors. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

.. _local-ledger:

Causality and Local Ledgers
###########################

DAML ledgers do not totally order all transactions.
So different parties may observe two transactions on different Participant Nodes in different orders via the :ref:`Ledger API <ledger-api-services>`.
Moreover, different Participant Nodes may output two transactions for the same party in different orders.
This document explains the ordering guarantees that DAML ledgers do provide, by :ref:`example <causality-examples>` and formally via the concept of :ref:`causality graphs <causality-graph>` and :ref:`local ledgers <local-ledger-structure>`.

The presentation assumes that you are familiar with the following concepts:

* The :ref:`Ledger API <ledger-api-services>`

* The :ref:`DAML Ledger Model <da-ledgers>`

.. _causality-examples:

Causality examples
******************

The following examples illustrate the ordering guarantees of the Ledger API.

> They use the paint counteroffer workflow from the DAML Ledger Model's :ref:`privacy section <da-model-privacy>`.

Author: Added two sentences.

Recall that :ref:`the party projections <da-paint-counteroffer-example>` are as follows:

.. https://www.lucidchart.com/documents/edit/c4df0455-13ab-415f-b457-f5654c2684be
.. image:: ./ledger-model/images/divulgence-for-disclosure-counteroffer.svg
   :align: center
   :width: 100%

.. _causality-example-create-archive:

Stakeholders of a contract see creation and archival in the same order.
=======================================================================

> The creation of the `CounterOffer A P Bank` is ordered before the painter exercising the consuming choice on the `CounterOffer`.

Author: Slightly reworded.

(If the **Create** was ordered after the **Exercise**, the resulting shared ledger would be inconsistent, which violates the validity guarantee of DAML ledgers.)
Accordingly, Alice will see the creation before the archival on her transaction stream and so will the painter.
This does not depend on whether they are hosted on the same Participant Node.

.. _causality-example-create-use-archive:

Signatories of a contract and stakeholder actors see usages after the creation and before the archival.
=======================================================================================================

The `Fetch A (Iou Bank A)` action comes after the creation of the `Iou Bank A` and before its archival,
for both Alice and the Bank,

> because the Bank is a signatory of the `Iou Bank A` contract and Alice is stakeholder of the `Iou Bank A` contract and an actor on the **Fetch** action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
because the Bank is a signatory of the `Iou Bank A` contract and Alice is a stakeholder of the `Iou Bank A` contract and an actor on the **Fetch** action.
```

In practice, this can happen in a setup where two Participant Nodes `N`:sub:`1` and `N`:sub:`2` host the painter.
He sees the divulged `Iou` and the created `CounterOffer` through `N`:sub:`1`\ 's transaction tree stream
and then submits the acceptance through `N`:sub:`1`.
Like in the previous example, `N`:sub:`2` does not know about the dependence of the two commits.
Accordingly, `N`:sub:`2` may output the accepting transaction *before* the `ShowIou` contract on the transaction stream.
      
Even though this may seem unexpected, it is in line with stakeholder-based ledgers:
Since the painter is not a stakeholder of the `Iou` contract, he should not care about the archivals or creates of the contract.
In fact, the divulged `Iou` contract shows up neither in the painter's active contract service nor in the flat transaction stream.
Such witnessed events are included in the transaction tree stream as a convenience:
They relieve the painter from computing the consequences of the choice and enable him to check that the action conforms to the DAML model.

> By a similar argument, being an actor of an **Exercise** action induces order with respect to other uses of the contract only if the actor is a contract stakeholder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, being an actor of an **Exercise** action induces order with respect to other uses of the contract only if the actor is a contract stakeholder.
```

  `reduce`:sub:`X`\ `(G)` is called the `X`\ -**reduction** of `G`.
  As before, `X` is omitted if it contains all actions in `G`.

The causality graph for the `CounterOffer` workflow is minimal and therefore its own reduction.
It is also the reduction of the topological sort, i.e., the :ref:`ledger <split-counteroffer-ledger>` in the :ref:`out-of-band causality example <causality-example-out-of-band>`.

.. note::
   The reduction `reduce`:sub:`X`\ `(G)` of an `X`\ -consistent causality graph `G` can be computed as follows:
   
   #. Set the vertices of `G'` to the vertices of `G`.
   #. The causal consistency conditions for contracts and keys demand that certain pairs of actions
      `act`:sub:`1` and `act`:sub:`2` in `X` must be action-ordered.
      For each such pair, determine the actions' ordering in `G` and add an edge to `G'` from the earlier action's transaction to the later action's transaction.
   #. `reduce`:sub:`X`\ `(G)` is the transitive closure of `G'`.

Topological sort and reduction link causality graphs `G` to the ledgers `L` from the DAML Ledger Model.

> Topological sort transforms a causality graph `G` into a sequence of transactions `topo(G)`; extending them with the requesters gives a sequence of commits, i.e., a ledger in the DAML Ledger Model.

Reviewer: Minor: notation `topo(-)` not defined before. Is it a function or a relation?

Reviewer 2: I read this as being the definition of `topo` as in " For a causality graph `G`, `topo(G)` is the topological sort of `G`"

Author: It was meant as @bame-da writes. But we actually use this notation only once more, so I removed it completely.

Definition »Causal consistency for a party«
  A causality graph `G` is **consistent for a party** `P` (`P`-consistent) if `G` is consistent on all the actions that `P` is an informee of.

The notions of `X`\ -minimality and `X`\ -reduction extend to parties accordingly.

For example, the :ref:`counteroffer causality graph without the edge tx2 -> tx4 <causality-counteroffer-Iou-minimal>` is consistent for the Bank because the Bank is an informee of exactly the highlighted actions.
It is also minimal Bank-consistent and the Bank-reduction of the :ref:`original counteroffer causality graph <causality-graph-couteroffer-split>`.
  
Definition »Projection of a consistent causality graph«
  The **projection** `proj`:sub:`P`\ `(G)` of a consistent causality graph `G` to a party `P` is the `P`\ -reduction of the following causality graph `G'`:

  * The vertices of `G'` are the vertices of `G` projected to `P`, excluding empty projections.

  * There is an edge between two vertices `v`:sub:`1` and `v`:sub:`2` in `G'` if there is an edge from the `G`\ -vertex corresponding to `v`:sub:`1` to the `G`\ -vertex corresponding to `v`:sub:`2`.

> For the :ref:`Counteroffer causality graph <causality-graph-couteroffer-split>`, the projections to Alice, the Bank, and the painter are as follows.

Reviewer: This is the "split counteroffer", do we consistently (what a pun!) distinguish between the split and the "normal" one in the doc?

Author: No, we didn't. I've added a lot more `split` to the text to make it uniform.
